Today I want to talk about reproducible, dynamic, and elegant books with Quarto. And if you've seen
me give talks before, particularly on the topic of Quarto, especially if I'm trying to cover a
tool, I try to do my best to convey the best practices and sort of do a comprehensive overview.
Today's talk is going to be a little bit different. It's going to be about things that
have worked for me in my adventures with writing books with Quarto. So some of these practices
could be best, some of them might be good, and some might just be good enough. And since we're
keeping things personal, I thought I'd bring my favorite book along with me. Some of you with a
keen eye might already realize, but it's The Little Prince. I love the story. Some of my favorite
quotes come from it. But today I'm not going to be talking about the story, not the content of the
book, but instead the making of the book. So my favorite types of books look like this. And for
those of you in the back, they look like this. These pop-up books. I've loved these since I was
a child. I had zero ambitions of ever being an author, to be perfectly honest. I still don't know
how I've stumbled into this. But if I could, I would actually quit what I do and make pop-up books.
Well, I'm not going to do that, but I'll talk about making of Quarto books today. And I'm going to
talk about three books that I've worked on over the last year. The first one is Introduction to
Modern Statistics. This is an open source introductory statistics book. And the characteristic
of this book related to this talk is that it uses code, but it doesn't teach or show code. So figures
and tables are made with code in a Quarto document, but the purpose of this particular
textbook is not to teach code. The second one might be one that many, many of you are familiar
with, R for Data Science, that I've had the pleasure of joining the team to write the book in
its second edition. And as you probably all know, it does teach code. So we have code and we display
code. And the last one is a work in progress. And it's a little meta. It's a book about Quarto
written in Quarto. So let's start with IMS, as I call it, Introduction to Modern Statistics.
And there are two things that I want to highlight about this book, multiple outputs and accessibility
checks. So let's start with multiple outputs. Ultimately, I want a web book, an HTML, and I
also want a PDF. And this seems like a no-brainer working with Quarto. We set format HTML, format
PDF, and we should be on our happy way to go. But if you take a careful look at these two pages,
these are not default themed pages. There are these boxes, for example, at the beginning of
each chapter that sort of give us a summary. There's an icon, there's coloring, so on and so
forth. And our goal was to get them to look as close to each other as possible. How do we achieve
this? Well, it's one source. So we put it in a fence div, and we give it a class. So in this
case, that's the chapter intro class. And then for HTML, with the help of meticulous styling
and with an SCSS file, I write a class for chapter intro and basically give it some things. Like, I
want some padding, I want some borders, I want some background color, I want an icon. That works
nicely for HTML, but how do we get it to work for PDF? Well, maybe some of you will recognize this
with a lot of ambition, coffee, frustration. You can make it happen, and you can get close enough.
What you're seeing here, even if you've never had to write LaTeX code in this way, and if so,
I envy you, is that we're defining some sort of basically the equivalent of divs environments.
You can see that we're using the same name, you can see that we are referring to the same icons,
and ultimately try to get them to look as alike as possible. And then Korto allows us to define
a theme where I pull in this SCSS file, and then for HTML, and also include in the header,
the style file that I wrote. Now, what is HTML without dark mode, right? So we have to have dark
mode, obviously, because my students are really willing to study all night long, so they need the
dark mode. So how do we do this? Another SCSS file where we tweak things minorly and make sure that
things are still legible, and we pull that in our Korto.yaml file as well. But this all sounds like
magic, but it's not all magic. Then comes the PDF, which requires page breaks. And if you've ever
had to do LaTeX documents that are multi-page, you have to painstakingly add these clear page
or new page type commands over and over, wherever they go. But the nice thing is you can. The word
I've recently heard used was litter your QMD file with these tags, because HTML processing
will completely ignore it. But when you're rendering to PDF, they will get picked up,
and another, and another, and ultimately, you actually get to have the page breaks where you
want them. Now, let's bring back the magic. The fact that a QMD to HTML process will ignore
things that it has no business means that I can continue to litter my QMD document with index tags.
So here, for example, I'm defining a term that in the HTML format I just want bolded,
but when I have a PDF output, so for the printed book, I actually want to make an index, so I tag
that. And then, in addition to tagging this throughout, which is a manual process that you
as the author are going to want to do, the things that you want in your index, you then write a
tech file that is going to be included at the end of the processing of your PDF that basically says
in the back matter, print index, and then your Corta YAML gives you a place to declare that as
well. It says, let's include that after the body and create our index. Then, when you render to PDF,
Corta will actually take a little bit longer and render things twice to get the page references
correctly for all your index calls. All right, well, that was all nice, but what I am looking
forward to, and I have the, you know, luxury of giving this talk towards the end of the conference, is
typed. So today, it's one source, two style files, and two outputs. Hopefully, next time I'm touching
this book, I'll be able to get away with one source, one style file, and two outputs. We'll see.
If we can get there, great, and if not, that's also fine. But another thing that working with
these multiple outputs does, in addition to the styling, is sort of your code output. So today,
a lot of the code in the book looks like this. Let's do some data processing to create a table
and then make a table out of it that will be printed both in HTML and in PDF. And the cable
extra package is wonderful for this, I've found, but I have to declare things, some for HTML and
some for PDF. So each of my code cells where I am creating tables have a lot of lines of code.
Why is that annoying? Because sometimes, I change my mind, and changing everything
can be quite tedious to make sure I catch all of the occurrences of these.
So hopefully, soon enough, we're going to be able to do something like this and pipe it into
a package that maybe can process, and we've seen some examples of this already, where maybe we can
get away with not having to declare separate options for PDF and HTML. All right, the next
thing that I want to mention in the context of this textbook is some accessibility features.
Now, Korto allows you to write, for example, alternative text for your figures, and the best
practice is that as you create your plot, you write the alternative text at the time of writing
the caption or whatever else. And then what happens is when you are actually reading this
book in the browser, the screen reader, to the screen reader, this accessible text, the alternative
text is accessible to it, and it reads it out loud for you. Unfortunately, I hate to admit, particularly
because this was a second edition of a book, at times I've gotten sloppy and maybe forgotten to
add these in a few places. Then I look to see how many places, how do I make sure that all of the
figures have alternative text. Well, it looks like every single plot is created with ggplot in this
book. So if I search on GitHub, there are 46 files that have ggplot calls in them, and actually
there's about 419 references to ggplot. So I'm definitely not going to manually go through each
and every one of these cells. So what I'm about to show you is not a package, is not even necessarily
a single function, but a snippet of code that you can make use to sort of parse your QMD file. So
the package I'm going to leverage here is parsermd. I'm going to use that to, once I read my QMD file,
and note that I've broken one of my QMD files from my chapter to remove one of the alternative
texts so that we can get an alert when something is missing. I pipe that into the parseQMD function,
which basically splits it into the markdown text and the code. And then I'm looking for anything
that is a code chunk that basically matches ggplot2 in its contents and does not have the option
fig out. Then I can ask it to give me the label for that. I do meticulously label all of my code
cells, so this is good enough generally for me to go back and add that. But if you haven't done so,
you can also say give me the contents of that code cell, and then you can just sort of
like control F in your document to find them. I think in a future iteration, I'd maybe like to
turn all of this into a function and maybe even have it be automatically checked every time I push
my files to GitHub. But at least the tooling is there for you to be able to check for these things.
All right, let's move on to the second book, R for Data Science, and we're going to talk about
two things here. Continue to talk about how we can leverage R as we write Corto books, and also
talk about GitHub Actions a little bit. So when you want to solve a problem in a new tool, you can try
to learn everything about that new tool, or you can say, do I have anything that I brought with me
that I can maybe use? So at the beginning of each of our chapters in R for Data Science, we load a
file called common.r or underscore common.r. What are the types of things we do for that? We set a
seed for every single one of the chapters, a very special day of the year for those of you who know.
We set code chunk options that are going to apply to every single one of our code chunks. We can
override them on a per chunk basis, but we want something consistent. Some R options, and also
set a theme. My collaborator loves theme gray, even though I'm more of a theme minimal gal, so we stuck
with theme gray. And we set a base size of 12, so all of the plots look consistent with each other.
And we can keep going with this. These are very obvious things to put in a common R type file and
to start every one of your book chapters with. But other things we've done is that this was a living
and breathing document, and a lot of people use R for Data Science, and we didn't want to keep the
text away from them as we were working on the second edition. In fact, many a times we've asked
for feedback as we were writing the text. So how do we do that? We can share that with the world,
but we also need to alert them that things might be in shambles, particularly for people like me
who are educators. We don't want people sending their students to a page and then the next day,
like, we've completely altered that page. So we wanted to have some sort of signaling. And
at the time, either there wasn't or we couldn't think of a way to do this purely with Corto,
so what can you do? Use your R function writing skills as an escape hat, and to avoid duplication.
So write a function that says, we'll give you a status, and based on that status, choose the
callout box type and write some text for us. And at the beginning of each one of our chapters,
we set a status, and as we went through the drafting and polishing and complete, we updated
these so our readers could know. Well, this was back in the day. If you're doing this today,
Corto actually does have features for doing this, the announcement banner that you can add to your
Corto pages. So you could choose the approach where you can have more, perhaps, fine-tuned
control of what that message might look like, or you can sort of use an out-of-the-box option with
Corto. All right. Another thing is that you want to be able to set it and forget it when you're
writing a book. So how do we keep things in check daily? Well, I live a life where sometimes on a
Sunday morning at 10, 18 a.m., I get emails like this, something failed. And I'm like, okay, we'll
get to you later. So how is this happening? So one of the things we do with R for Data Science is we
have completely avoided the freeze option for Corto, which means that every day when we run the
checks, every single line of code reruns. This may very well be overkill for many projects. In fact,
for many, many projects that I work on, it totally is. But we wanted to make sure that particularly
at a time when we were making changes to R for Data Science, as well as the packages it is writing
about and updating the packages, that at all times we could check to make sure that the latest version
of that package and the code were in check with each other. So every night at 11 p.m., R for Data
Science rebuilds. And some nights it's a nice green check. And some nights we get an email. And then we
look to see what can be done to fix it. So using GitHub Actions, you can do these daily checks.
You may have heard this quote before. Whenever faced with a problem, some people say,
let's use regular expressions. Now they have two problems. There's a nice Hacker News-like
thread about where the source of this is, who the source of this quote is. And here's one from me.
Let's use GitHub Actions. Now you have so many more problems. Well, don't reinvent the wheel.
There is, you can borrow from other people's GitHub Actions. And you can also, there's a
Corto Actions repo that you can sort of like grab actions from to start with. And finally, briefly,
let's talk about Corto, the Definitive Guide, which is a work in progress. So here we're using
multiple languages and multiple computing environments. So we want two languages in a
single QMD file. And we want each of them to be executed with our own engine. So not using
reticulate basically in between them. How do we do this? We're actually using the embed option that
you're going to see a lot of mentioned in Corto manuscript-type projects to create separate
notebooks that we're going to embed individual cells from. So here we have a tab set with R and
Python. And we're embedding from these notebooks, each of which have an R notebook and a Python
notebook, each of which have a code cell called plot. And now you can see that as a result, we have
been able to sort of like go between. And if you recognize outputs of Knitter and Jupyter engines,
you'll see that these look like how you would expect them to look like. And here I'm going to
say let's do use Freeze because we are managing multiple environments. And the last thing you want
to do when you pour yourself a nice cup of coffee and say, I'm going to write some today, is to like
manage a virtual environment. So if your collaborator has done a bit of work and frozen
their computations, let, you know, benefit from that and use the frozen computations and work on
your chapters. So I'm going to say so you can safeguard your sanity with Freeze as well.
All right. To wrap things up, I've tried to talk about making books. And I hope that you will find
that many of these books are pretty, but I also want to think about making books that are functional.
What do I mean by that? When you have pop-up books, sometimes you have things like this, where you're
interacting with a book. And sometimes it is just to keep the child busy. And sometimes that
interaction is really to tell the story. So these little tags allow you to discover more about the
story. So what I'm looking forward to in my next quarto book journey is this project that George
talked about earlier. We can now have code cells that are actually interactive in our books. So
hopefully in the next editions of these books that display the code, that's what you're going
to be seeing. Thank you so much for listening. The slides are at this link. And the repo
has the code for the slides as well as some of the code snippets that I've shown.
Thank you. We have time for just one question while the next speaker comes up.
You talked a little bit about accessibility in your talk. Are there any automated tools
you'd recommend for assessing accessibility? Yeah, so you can automate some of these tools.
So the type of check that I have done, you certainly can automate that. There are great R
packages even that will check for the accessibility of the color choices of your plots, for example.
So that would be another one that I would recommend. I'll also do a plug for this open
source tool that I've encountered a couple of years ago that I've been using called SimDaltonism.
Not automated, but it will put this like filter on your screen and you can check for color
accessibility sort of on the fly. And as someone who's not necessarily an expert in either
accessibility or web design, but who cares about it, I like these interactive tools that, you know,
sort of teach me things along the way as well.